.TH CXMOD 8 "2026-07-19" "cxmod 2.1.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
cxmod \- Connection eXperience MODule \- Linux server network diagnostics and tuning
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cxmod
.I subcommand
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cxmod
is a compiled C system utility that diagnoses and fixes the most common Linux
kernel networking bottlenecks. Like
.BR iproute2 (8)
and
.BR ethtool (8),
it reads directly from
.B /proc
and
.BR /sys \(em
no Python, no daemons, no runtime dependencies.
.PP
It solves the problems that ship misconfigured in stock Linux installations:
.TP
\(bu TCP buffer undersizing cutting 1\~Gbit throughput by 80\(en98%
.TP
\(bu conntrack table overflow dropping packets silently
.TP
\(bu IRQ imbalance saturating CPU\~0 while all other cores idle
.TP
\(bu TIME_WAIT accumulation starving new outbound connections
.TP
\(bu SYN backlog overflow under traffic spikes
.TP
\(bu Orphan socket accumulation causing OOM kills
.TP
\(bu IP fragment queue buildup from MTU mismatch
.TP
\(bu LRO misconfiguration on bridges and routers
.TP
\(bu Settings reset to defaults on every reboot
.TP
\(bu No unified actionable diagnostics
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.SS DIAGNOSTICS
.TP
.B diagnose
Run the full network health check (47+ checks). Reports CRITICAL, WARN, and OK
findings for TCP buffers, conntrack, TIME_WAIT, IRQ balance, SYN backlog,
retransmit rate, interface drops, MTU consistency, TCP memory pressure, orphan
sockets, IP fragmentation, and file descriptor limits. Exit code 1 if any
CRITICAL issues are found.
.TP
.B fix " [\-\-dry\-run]"
One-shot fix for all detected issues. Applies the balanced tuning profile, fixes
conntrack, balances IRQs, enables RPS/XPS, disables LRO on all interfaces, and
persists settings to
.IR /etc/sysctl.d/90\-cxmod.conf .
With
.B \-\-dry\-run
prints every command that would be executed without changing anything.
.TP
.B report " [\-\-output=\fIFILE\fR] [\-\-json]"
Generate a full timestamped diagnostic report. With
.B \-\-json
outputs machine-readable JSON for monitoring pipelines.
.SS TUNING
.TP
.BR "tune \-\-profile=" "\fIPROFILE\fR [\-\-dry\-run]"
Apply a named tuning profile:
.RS
.TP
.B balanced
General-purpose. Increases TCP buffers to 32\~MiB, enables tw_reuse,
syncookies, ECN, TCP fast open, sets somaxconn=4096.
.TP
.B high_throughput
Bulk transfers, CDN. 128\~MiB buffers, BBR congestion control, backlog=65535.
.TP
.B low_latency
VoIP, gaming, interactive SSH. Short keepalive and FIN_WAIT, minimal latency.
.TP
.B satellite
High-RTT WAN (>100\~ms). 256\~MiB buffers, BBR, no slow-start-after-idle.
.TP
.B hardened
Security-focused DMZ. No timestamps, no TFO, strict rp_filter, ICMP hardening.
.RE
.TP
.B "tune \-\-list"
List all profiles with descriptions.
.TP
.B "tune \-\-current"
Show current kernel parameter values.
.TP
.BR "tune \-\-bdp " "\fIMbit\fR \fIms\fR"
Calculate the optimal TCP socket buffer for the given bandwidth (Mbit/s) and
RTT (ms) using BDP = bandwidth \(mu RTT.
.TP
.B "tune \-\-auto\-bdp"
Auto-detect interface speeds from
.I /sys/class/net/*/speed
and compute recommended buffer sizes.
.TP
.BR "tune \-\-set " "\fIKEY\fR=\fIVALUE\fR"
Set a single sysctl parameter.
.SS PERSISTENCE
.TP
.BR "persist \-\-profile=" "\fIPROFILE\fR"
Apply the named profile and write settings to
.I /etc/sysctl.d/90\-cxmod.conf
for reboot persistence.
.TP
.B "persist \-\-show"
Display saved configuration.
.TP
.B "persist \-\-remove"
Remove
.IR /etc/sysctl.d/90\-cxmod.conf .
.SS CONNECTION TRACKING
.TP
.B "conntrack [\-\-stats]"
Show conntrack table usage.
.TP
.B "conntrack \-\-states"
Show TCP connection state breakdown from
.IR /proc/net/tcp .
.TP
.B "conntrack \-\-fix"
Scale conntrack table to RAM fraction, reduce TCP established timeout.
.SS IRQ AND PACKET STEERING
.TP
.B "irq [\-\-iface=\fINAME\fR]"
Show NIC IRQ distribution across CPUs.
.TP
.B "irq \-\-balance [\-\-iface=\fINAME\fR]"
Distribute IRQs round-robin across online CPUs via
.IR /proc/irq/N/smp_affinity .
.TP
.B "irq \-\-rps [\-\-iface=\fINAME\fR]"
Enable RPS and XPS packet steering via
.I /sys/class/net/IF/queues/rx-N/rps_cpus
and
.IR xps_cpus .
.SS NIC OFFLOAD
.TP
.B "offload [\-\-iface=\fINAME\fR]"
Show TSO, GSO, GRO, LRO, checksum offload status. Requires
.BR ethtool (8).
.TP
.B "offload \-\-fix\-lro [\-\-iface=\fINAME\fR]"
Disable LRO (Large Receive Offload). Recommended on routers and bridges.
.TP
.B "offload \-\-set \fIFEATURE\fR on|off"
Toggle a NIC offload feature via
.BR "ethtool -K" .
.SS QOS TRAFFIC SHAPING
.TP
.B "qos \-\-apply \-\-iface=\fINAME\fR \-\-bw=\fIMbit\fR"
Apply a 4-class HTB QoS: SSH/DNS > HTTP/HTTPS > FTP/SFTP > bulk.
.TP
.B "qos \-\-remove \-\-iface=\fINAME\fR"
Remove QoS from interface.
.TP
.B "qos \-\-show [\-\-iface=\fINAME\fR]"
Show active qdiscs and classes.
.SS ROUTING
.TP
.B "route [\-\-show]"
Display kernel routing table from
.IR /proc/net/route .
.TP
.B "route \-\-add \fIDEST\fR [via \fIGW\fR] [dev \fIIF\fR] [metric \fIM\fR]"
Add a static route.
.TP
.B "route \-\-del \fIDEST\fR"
Delete a route.
.SS STATISTICS
.TP
.B proto
Protocol statistics from
.IR /proc/net/snmp .
.TP
.B sockstat
Socket and buffer statistics from
.IR /proc/net/sockstat .
.TP
.B "iface [\-\-iface=\fINAME\fR]"
Interface statistics from
.I /proc/net/dev
and
.IR /sys/class/net/* .
.TP
.B "monitor [\-\-iface=\fINAME\fR] [\-\-interval=\fIms\fR]"
Live RX/TX throughput monitor (default interval: 1000\~ms).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Print commands without executing.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Verbose output.
.TP
.B \-\-json
JSON output (diagnose, report).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI colour.
.TP
.BI \-\-iface= NAME
Target interface.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/sysctl.d/90\-cxmod.conf
Persistent sysctl settings written by
.BR "cxmod persist" .
.TP
.I /proc/net/route
Routing table.
.TP
.I /proc/net/sockstat
Socket statistics.
.TP
.I /proc/net/snmp
Protocol statistics.
.TP
.I /proc/net/dev
Interface counters.
.TP
.I /proc/net/tcp
TCP connection table.
.TP
.I /proc/irq/N/smp_affinity
IRQ CPU affinity.
.TP
.I /sys/class/net/IF/queues/rx-N/rps_cpus
RPS CPU mask.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
sudo cx diagnose
sudo cx fix
sudo cx fix \-\-dry\-run
sudo cx tune \-\-profile=high_throughput
sudo cx persist \-\-profile=balanced
cx tune \-\-bdp 10000 20
cx tune \-\-auto\-bdp
sudo cx conntrack \-\-fix
sudo cx irq \-\-balance && sudo cx irq \-\-rps
sudo cx qos \-\-apply \-\-iface=eth0 \-\-bw=1000
cx report \-\-json \-\-output=/tmp/report.json
cx monitor \-\-interval=500
.fi
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Exit code 0 if no CRITICAL findings, 1 otherwise.
.SH LICENSE
Apache-2.0-or-later.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sysctl (8),
.BR ethtool (8),
.BR tc (8),
.BR ip (8),
.BR ss (8)
